hey everyone welcome back to the channel
uh I wanted to come on here and just
take a quick moment to discuss cap
theorem specifically in the context of
system design interviews and so there's
a lot of content on cap theum online I'm
sure you've read some of it uh but most
of which I find makes it way more
daunting than it needs to be and none of
which explains particularly well why it
matters specifically in the context of a
system design interview and so working
with candidates every single day as I do
as the co-founder of hello interview
it's shown me just how much confusion
there is around this
maybe seemingly simple topic uh and so I
want to hop on here and see if we could
solve that confusion for you all uh kind
of once and for all so if we turn our
attention to the Whiteboard we can start
with the very basic definition what is
Cap theorem well cap theorem states that
you can only have two out of three of
the following consistency availability
and partition tolerance so in a
distributed system as is almost always
the case in our system design interviews
you'll have to choose two out of these
three and so consistency we'll get into
more details on each of these later on
but consistency at a high level just
means that all users see the same data
at the same
time availability means that every
request gets a response whether it's
successful or not and then partition
tolerance is defined as the system works
despite Network failures between nodes
now why does this even matter in the
first place why do we care about cap
theorem and a system design interview
that's because in a system design
interview the first thing that you're
going to do is you're going to align on
the requir Ms with your interviewer and
this is usually the functional
requirements the features of the system
and then the non-functional requirements
which are the qualities of the system
now when you're going over the
non-functional requirements the first
thing you should do is start with cap
theorem you should ask yourself does
this system need to prioritize
consistency or
availability and the reason that's the
question is because if we come back up
here to cap theorem partition tolerance
in a distributed system is a must so
we've chosen one out of our three and
now the question that you in a system
design interview need to wrestle with is
simply do I prioritize consistency in my
system or do PRI do I prioritize
availability and this ends up being
really important because it's going to
have a significant influence on your
design later on in the Deep Dives but
why are these two things at odds with
one another in the first place why do we
have to choose between consistency and
availability why not both well let's
look at an example which will hopefully
answer that question imagine that you
host a website
this website has two servers one located
in the USA and one located in Europe now
user a goes to write data to the server
that they're connected to located in the
United States let's say this data that
they're writing is an update to their
public profile maybe they're just
updating their name once they do so that
data is replicated to the server in
Europe so that when user B goes to read
the public profile of user a they see
that latest data the updated name easy
now what happens if this network
connection between these two servers
gets severed for some reason it goes
down and more importantly what happens
if it goes down uh before we had a
chance to replicate that data that
updated data from user uh from server a
to the server in Europe well at this
point we as a system have a decision to
make when user B goes to read this data
should we a give them an error because
this data is now stale and so we don't
want them to read stale data or B do we
just let them view the stale
data so writing that down in the case of
a network failure should we a stop
serving the data if we choose that
option then our system has prioritized
strong
consistency if we chose that we can just
risk giving them wrong data seeing the
old name for a little bit until this is
back online and figures itself out uh if
that's okay then our system chose
availability so what are some examples
where we would choose option A we would
stop serving data because we prioritized
consistency in the context of cap theum
well the first option would be if it was
like a ticket booking platform either
Airlines or events hotels and so imagine
that what user a was doing when they
wrote was that they were choosing seat
6A in an airplane and then our Network
failure broke well user B is looking to
book a seat on the same flight and if we
showed them that seat 6A was still
available when it's not this would be
catastrophic it would mean that they
could book seat 6A and both user a and
user B would show up to the airport on
the same day thinking that they're going
to sit in the same seat obviously a
problem so in that case we would choose
consistency over availability what about
like an inventory system like Amazon
imagine that you're down to your last
item user a is buying the last
toothbrush on Amazon uh if we have our
Network failure and user B goes and
looks they would see that there was one
AA ailable and they would buy it too now
we only have one item but we have two
users that think that they bought it
that's catastrophic lastly another
common example is financial systems
imagine that user a goes to buy a stock
and they hit the USA server user B goes
to either buy or sell that same stock
well the value of that stock
particularly if it's a low float might
have changed depending on the size of
this sale in particular and so the order
book needs to be kind of up to date and
in this case it wouldn't be so we need
to choose strong consistency we should
show user be in error as opposed to
showing them out ofate
information now if you don't need strong
consistency then you would choose
availability and this would be
everything else of course this list
isn't exhaustive but in the case where
you don't need strong consistency in the
case where you can risk stale data this
is the overwhelming majority of cases
like our first example with profile data
so what if user B reads the wrong name
for a little period of time who cares so
anything like in a social media app a
user a posts some data user B doesn't
see their post for a while or doesn't
see an update to their post no big deal
what about a service like Yelp where
there's businesses that get reviewed and
so maybe user a is a business and
they're updating their business
information and user B is a customer and
they're going to see slightly out ofd
business information for a couple
seconds or maybe up to a minute or so
it's totally fine we would rather show
them the business because we want that
business then uh you know care that one
menu item is slightly out of date for a
couple seconds
same too with Netflix what if we change
the description on a new movie or we
update a new movie or we add a movie is
it okay that the person in Europe
doesn't see it for a couple seconds or
they see something that's stale or out
of date for a couple seconds of course
it is and so what it comes down to in
your interview is that when you're going
over your non-functional requirements
you are asking yourself a simple
question does this system need strong
consistency does it matter that every
single user sees the same state of my
system at any given time time and if
they didn't would it be catastrophic if
the answer to that question is yes
you're going to prioritize consistency
over availability if the answer to that
question is no then you're going to
prioritize availability over consistency
great you made your decision in your
non-functional requirements you decided
either to prioritize consistency or
availability but how does this influence
Your Design now you have to go design
the system well if you chose strong
consistency you're going to keep a
couple things in mind you might need to
implement distributed transactions so if
you had for example a cash in a database
you need to ensure that those two things
remain strongly consistent and so you'll
have to guarantee that when a right
happens to one the right happens to the
other implementing a distributed
transaction to ensure this you also
might limit things to a single node like
maybe your database is a single instance
if it's a single instance then there
can't be these propagation issues right
and so you'll do the math and you might
say for my airline ticket booking system
I have a single database here and that
single database is going to be something
like a postgress database or a SQL
database for which I can issue Atomic
transactions and this way everybody
views the same data because they're all
reading from the same instance we also
might need to just accept higher latency
right so we're going to have to show
users Spinners or something while we're
waiting for propagation to happen um
between instances and so some example
tools or traditional relational database
Management Systems your postgress is
your sqls spanner offered by Google is a
great option note that this doesn't mean
if you have consistency you can't go
with nosql many nosql databases offer
strong consistency modes Dynamo DB
offers one of them um it's controversial
to some whether or not this would be the
right choice in my opinion it's totally
fine now what about if you ended up
going with availability well if you go
with availability then you can use
multiple replicas you're going to scale
out your system and can have different
read replicas and it's okay if there's
propagation between those read replicas
eventual consist is okay things like CDC
change data capture which is by
definition eventually consistent is okay
to use in your system uh you're going to
use things like Dynam DB not with that
strong consistency mode but with like
multiple availability zones could be the
configuration there Technologies like
Cassandra uh which are well optimized
for high availability these are all good
decisions if you decided to prioritize
availability in your system last thing
before we wrap up here I have some
Nuance to throw at you if you are a
junior or mid-level candidate you might
want to just stop the video now I don't
want things to get confusing if you're
senior or up then this is important to
know and the important thing to
understand here is that while we choose
availability or consistency and those
things are at odds we can have different
parts of our system that prioritize
different requirements so to make that
clear imagine Ticket Master is a really
good example in Ticket Master as we
discussed we want to PRI prioritize
consistency for booking tickets because
we can't have double booking we can't
have two users thinking they have the
same seat but there are other parts of
our system for which we should
prioritize availability like for example
the crud on events so creating updating
deleting events if a user goes and
updates the event description it's okay
if that's eventually consistent uh it's
better that people can always view the
event and so in a system design
interview you could be nuanced here with
your interviewer and you could say as it
pertains to cap theorem I'm going to
prioritize availability for searching
and viewing events but I'm going to
prioritize consistency for booking
tickets to events let's look at another
example consider Tinder Tinder is a
similar case where we need consistency
for matching because if user a swiped on
me in Europe and then I swipe on them in
the United States I want to immediately
show the user a match you matched right
when you swipe if you're the second
person swiping and so I need a
consistent view of who swiped of me cool
so consistency for matching but when it
comes to viewing profile data again if a
user went and updated their profile to a
different picture or something like this
it's okay if I see the old picture for a
while couple seconds minutes so be it
and so in Tinder I would say to my
interviewer I'm going to prioritize
availability for viewing profile data
and updating profile data but I'm going
to prioritize consistency for match
data now there's one other thing in this
so-called Advanced section that's
relevant you'll hear consistency always
used and people will just say
consistency in the context of cap
theorem what they really mean is strong
consistency they mean all reads reflect
that most recent write this is what
we've been talking about so if you hear
consistency in this context just think
strong consistency but the reality is
there's different levels to consistency
and if you want to be fancy you can get
into the Nuance of these different
levels in your system and so there's
also what's called causal consistency
and this just ensures that related
events appear in the same order and so
for example you can't have a comment on
a post uh maybe replying to a previous
comment right that comes before that
comment it's replying to that wouldn't
make makes sense so it's okay if these
things take a while to come in and not
everyone sees all the same comments but
nobody should see a comment replying to
a previous comment in the inverted order
hopefully that makes sense uh a third
one here is read your own rights
consistency and so this is that I as a
user should have a consistent view of
what I've just done but other users
could see something different and so
back to our USA Europe example user a
who updated their profile should
immediately see their own profile update
or else they'll think the system was
broken so they need read your rights
consistency but the system doesn't need
strong consistency because user B in
Europe can still see the old thing
that's fine and then of course as I've
been alluding to throughout this this
whole interview the lowest level of
consistency is that eventual consistency
so when we choose availability over
consistency we're not saying our
system's not going to be consistent
we're just saying that we're okay with
eventual consistency we're okay that
it's going to take a while for the
system to level outed into a consistent
state so if you want to go into each of
these in your interview it can show some
Nuance it can show some senior some
staff level thinking when you be
specific here all right folks thanks for
watching hopefully this was useful let
me know in the comments what you think
of this new format it ended up being
longer than I thought it would be I
thought this would be five minutes but
uh you know let me know I want to hop in
here and maybe make some of these
periodically when I when I learn that
something is a little bit more confusing
to folks um as always we got a bunch of
great breakdowns on the website hello
interview.com a bunch more deep Dives on
content just like this check it out and
then actually at the end of this month
November 2024 I don't know when you're
watching this uh we're going to be
launching a bunch more contents kind of
in a premium offering so people are
always asking for more content the free
content will always continue the YouTube
will continue um but we will have even
more content for those who want to pay
for premium so keep an eye on an eye out
for that that'll be coming at the end of
the month awesome all right folks good
luck with your interviews